Custom loop pmap example (#346)
google/jaxopt: docs/notebooks/distributed/custom_loop_pmap_example.md

# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
```

+++ {"id": "nCt2V9cCR-CF"}

[![Open in Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/google/jaxopt/blob/main/docs/notebooks/distributed/custom_loop_pmap_example.ipynb)

+++ {"id": "N3RErasEJpMo"}

`jax.pmap` example using JAXopt.
=========================================
The purpose of this example is to illustrate how JAXopt solvers can be easily
used for distributed training thanks to `jax.pmap`. In this case, we begin by
implementing data parallel training of a multi-class logistic regression model
on synthetic data. General aspects to pay attention to include:
* How to use `jax.lax` reduction operators such as `jax.lax.pmean` or
 `jax.lax.psum` in JAXopt solvers by using custom `value_and_grad` functions.
* How `jax.pmap` can be used to transform the solver's `update` method to easily
  write custom data-parallel training loops.

> Running the notebook on Google Colab:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To obtain the best performance on Google Colab we recommend:
```
(since the example will likely still work on CPU/GPU)

Author: Done, thank you!

NUM_CLASSES = 10  #@param{type:"integer"}
#@markdown The stepsize for the optimizer (set to 0.0 to use line search):
STEPSIZE = 0.0  #@param{type:"number"}
#@markdown The line search approach (either `'zoom'` or `backtracking`), ignored if `STEPSIZE > 0.0`:
LINESEARCH = 'zoom'  #@param{type:"string"}
```

+++ {"id": "9cSpF3jQMezP"}

# Imports and TPU setup

```{code-cell}
:id: AkeC41JXNTv0

%%capture
%pip install jaxopt flax
```

```{code-cell}
:id: 6UypR4hUNbve

import functools
import time
from typing import Any, Callable, Tuple, Union

from absl import app
from absl import flags

from flax import jax_utils
from flax.training import common_utils

import jax
import jax.numpy as jnp
import jax.tools.colab_tpu

import jaxopt

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

import numpy as np

from sklearn import datasets
```

```{code-cell}
---
colab:
  base_uri: https://localhost:8080/
id: iMxI2ZU0JnJO
outputId: 762fb71d-802b-4be1-8dc7-0edd62ab36ca
---
jax.tools.colab_tpu.setup_tpu()
jax.local_devices()
```

+++ {"id": "8ZReXwUIO4Tt"}

# Type aliases

```{code-cell}
:id: 5A_PBZ7OO5rO

Array = Union[np.ndarray, jax.Array]
```

+++ {"id": "gbqilnNSNpw1"}

# Auxiliary functions

> A MWE of how all-reduce mean/sum OPs can be introduced into JAXopt solver's `update` method by overriding `jax.value_and_grad`. Note that more complex wrappers are of course possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A minimal working example of how all-reduce mean/sum OPs can be introduced into JAXopt solver's `update` method by overriding `jax.value_and_grad`. Note that more complex wrappers are of course possible.
```

```{code-cell}
:id: awxxl498NwMI

def pmean(fun: Callable[..., Any], axis_name: str = 'b') -> Callable[..., Any]:
  """Applies `jax.lax.pmean` across `axis_name` for all of `fun`'s outputs."""
  maybe_pmean = lambda t: jax.lax.pmean(t, axis_name) if t is not None else t
  @functools.wraps(fun)
  def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
    return jax.tree_map(maybe_pmean, fun(*args, **kwargs))
  return wrapper
```

+++ {"id": "clQeXb77ObhK"}

A small utility to shard `Array`s across the available devices:

```{code-cell}
:id: rMntHIEFOeyO

def shard_array(array: Array) -> jax.Array:
  """Shards `array` along its leading dimension."""
  return jax.device_put_sharded(
      shards=list(common_utils.shard(array)),
      devices=jax.devices())
```

+++ {"id": "4Pph9LUAOmhi"}

# Custom-loop

> Shows a comparison of how single-device and data-parallel SPMD differ in a vanilla JAXopt custom training loop

Reviewer: could we replace SPMD by a term that's less technical/intimidating? 

Also, it would be nice to be a bit more explicit here on where is the comparison since the actual comparison won't happen until (relatively) much later. How about something like:

The following code uses data-parallelism in the train loop. Through the `use_pmap` keyword argument we can deactivate this parallelism. We'll use this feature later to benchmark the impact of parallelism.

Author: Thanks Fabian, your phrasing is so much better. Done!

      be used instead.
    linesearch: The linesearch algorithm to use. If `stepsize > 0`, linsearch
      will be disabled.
    use_pmap: Whether to distribute the computation across replicas or use only
      the first device available.
  
  Returns:
    The per-step errors and runtimes, as well as the JIT-compile time for the
    solver's `update` function.
  """
  # Value and grad of the objective function for the solver.
  value_and_grad_fun = jax.value_and_grad(jaxopt.objective.multiclass_logreg)
  # When `jax.pmap`ing the computation, use JAXopt's option to provide a custom
  # `value_and_grad` function to include the desired reduction operators. For
  # example, here we decide to average across replicas.
  if use_pmap:
    value_and_grad_fun = pmean(value_and_grad_fun)

  # To override `jax.value_and_grad` in a JAXopt solver, set the flag 
  # `value_and_grad` to `True` and pass the custom implementation of the
  # `value_and_grad` function as `fun`.
  solver = jaxopt.LBFGS(fun=value_and_grad_fun,
                        value_and_grad=True,
                        stepsize=stepsize,
                        linesearch=linesearch)

>   # As usual, apply the `jax.pmap` transform to the function to be computed in

Reviewer: I would remove "As usual", not sure to what it refers to (earlier in the script, general JAX idioms?)

Author: I was referring to it being arguably the most common usage pattern of `jax.pmap`, but fully agreed it doesn't bring anything here. Thanks!
